Updated Python Learning Roadmap for Absolute Beginners (with College Syllabus)
Goal: Go from zero to building small Python projects in 3–6 months, blending college coursework (Units III-IV) with self-study projects. Assumes 4–8 hours/week, including class time.
Phase 1: Python Basics (Weeks 1–4)
Goal: Master foundational Python skills, aligning with college Unit-III. Why: Builds the base for coding and matches your course’s starting point.
Set Up Your Environment (Week 1)
Task: Install Python and a code editor (Python 3.12 from python.org, VS Code, or Pydroid 3 for mobile).
Practice: Run “Hello, World!”:
print("Hello, World!")
College Tie-In: Ensure setup aligns with any tools your course requires.
Learn Core Concepts (Weeks 1–3) – Unit-III
Topics (from syllabus):
Introduction to Python, getting started (identifiers, keywords)
Variable types, basic types (mutable/immutable), integer & float ranges
Assignment, Arithmetic Operators, Precedence & Associativity
Conversions, built-in functions, modules, container types, comments & indentation
Multiple Objects, Strings: Introduction, Accessing String elements, Properties
Multiple Methods, Conversions, Comparisons
Console I/O operations, formatted printing
Decision Control Instruction: Logical operators, Conditional Expressions, (||) & (||), receiving input, pass statement
Repetition Control Instruction: types, usage of loops, break & continue, else block of a loop
Practice:
Write a program to convert Celsius to Fahrenheit using operators.
Create a simple program with if-else to check if a number is positive.
Use loops to print numbers 1–10 with a break at 5.
Example (Loop with Break):
for i in range(1, 11):
    if i == 6:
        break
    print(i)
Resources:
Python.org Tutorial
W3Schools Python
Class notes and exercises from Unit-III.
Build Mini-Projects (Week 4)
Projects:
Number guessing game (use random, loops, and conditionals).
Simple string manipulator (e.g., reverse a user-input string).
College Tie-In: Use Unit-III concepts (e.g., strings, loops) in projects.
Milestone: You can write programs with basic logic, loops, and string operations, matching Unit-III completion.
Phase 2: Intermediate Concepts (Weeks 5–10)
Goal: Deepen skills with data structures and functions, aligning with college Unit-IV. Why: Expands your ability to organize code, matching the next course unit.
Learn Data Structures (Weeks 5–6) – Unit-IV
Topics (from syllabus):
Lists, Sets, Tuples, Dictionaries: creating, accessing, and looping-in each type
Applying basic operations, using built-in functions and methods on each type
Possible data structure / mathematical operations on each type
Comprehensions on List, Set, and Dictionary
Practice:
Create a list of movies and use methods (e.g., append, remove).
Write a program to count unique items in a set.
Use a dictionary to store names and ages, then loop through it.
Example (Dictionary Loop):
people = {"Alice": 25, "Bob": 30}
for name, age in people.items():
    print(f"{name} is {age} years old.")
Resources:
Automate the Boring Stuff (Chapter 4–6)
Class materials for Unit-IV.
Functions and Modular Code (Weeks 7–8) – Unit-IV
Topics (from syllabus):
Functions: built-in and user-defined functions, invoking functions
Unpacking arguments, recursive function, iteration vs recursion
Practice:
Write a function to calculate the factorial of a number (recursive).
Create a function to process a list (e.g., find the max value).
Example (Recursive Factorial):
def factorial(n):
    if n == 0:
        return 1
    return n * factorial(n - 1)
print(factorial(5))  # Output: 120
Resources:
Corey Schafer’s Python Tutorials
Unit-IV class exercises.
Build Mini-Projects (Weeks 9–10)
Projects:
Expense tracker (use dictionaries from Unit-IV).
Text-based adventure game (use functions and loops).
College Tie-In: Apply Unit-IV data structures and functions in projects.
Milestone: You can organize code with functions and handle data structures, matching Unit-IV completion.
Phase 3: Exploring Libraries and Real-World Applications (Weeks 11–16)
Goal: Use Python libraries and build practical projects, extending beyond the syllabus. Why: Prepares you for advanced topics or future courses.
Introduction to Libraries (Weeks 11–12)
Topics:
Using random, math, datetime modules
Basics of pandas (data analysis) and requests (web data)
Practice:
Generate a random quiz with random.
Fetch weather data with requests (using a free API like OpenWeatherMap).
Resources:
Real Python
Python Requests Docs
Build Bigger Projects (Weeks 13–16)
Projects:
Web Scraper (use requests and beautifulsoup4).
Data Analyzer (use pandas with a CSV file).
Automation Script (e.g., rename files).
Example (Simple Web Scraper):
import requests
from bs4 import BeautifulSoup
page = requests.get("https://example.com")
soup = BeautifulSoup(page.content, "html.parser")
print(soup.title.text)
Milestone: You can use libraries for real-world applications.